Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Jo Clayton is a science fiction and fantasy
writer who is a discovery of Donald A. Wollheim, publisher of DAW Books. Other
recent Wollheim discoveries are C.J. Cherryh and Tanith Lee. Clayton has published
seven novels in the Diadem series and two in the Duel of Sorcery series. She has
also published several short stories. Clayton began writing only after she was
well into her career. We asked her why she decided to become a writer and why
she chose science fiction. I've been teaching for a number of years. And I'm
also an artist. I draw a lot. And I was much more interested in painting and
drawing for my first years than I was in writing. But I gradually came to see
that while I have a gift for rendering, I can do quite good individual objects.
I don't have any feel for design. And I wasn't willing to take the trouble to
get work for that deal. So I decided to remain very much an amateur as a
painter. But having drawn that conclusion and being in a situation where I
needed to get out, I was about ready to bang my head against the walls. I'm not
going to be your examples of teacher burnout. And so I started writing as a way
of breaking away from the job I was in. And science fiction, well, because I've
always loved it, because I thought I could write it. And it is an awful lot of
fun making up worlds. Basically, that's it. Clayton's first novel, published in
1977, was Diadem from the Stars. She's published six more novels in the series
since then. The protagonist is Aleytys, a strange girl from a backward planet
who accidentally acquires the Diadem, an alien artifact which contains the
essences and identities of three remarkable humans. We asked Clayton if she had
the entire series planned before she wrote the first novel. It's like just about
every one of the novels that I write. I know where I'm starting, and I know my
characters, and I know my world. In this case, it's a series of worlds. And I
know where I'm going, but how I'm going to get there develops. I don't think I
could write any other way. I mean, it would be boring if I knew everything
before I started. For example, in Star Hunters, one of the secondary leads in
that, the woman who was more or less a toy, a plaything, the wife of one of the
other secondary leads in the subplot, is only supposed to be in there for about
three pages and so. But I suddenly got very interested in her, or she got me
interested in her, and she began to take over, and she became a very important
part of the book. And this was totally, totally unexpected. During each
installment in the Diadem series, Aleytys learns more about her past and her
quest. Here Clayton tells us of her plans for Aleytys in the series. In the
beginning, I meant to have Aleytys reach her, find her mother and her family in,
well, about the same as the number of books. I think there'll be about nine in
all. I just finished one and turned it in. I think that's the eighth. And the
next one will probably be the last in that particular series, dealing with
Aleytys as the main character.
Each book, I hope, shows, makes Aleytys a little bit more aware of who she is
and what she really wants rather than what she thought she wanted. And in the
end, she's going to end up, I hope, satisfied with where she is working and
living in that place for a while anyway. So I knew I was going to have her find
her mother and her mother's world. How I was going to get there, depending upon
the inspiration and the desperation of the moment. We'll have more on our next
show with Jo Clayton.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Jo Clayton's Diadem series comprises seven
novels so far. These are Diadem from the Stars, Lamarchos, Irsud, Maeve, Star
Hunters, The Nowhere Hunt, and Ghosthunt. Clayton's settings are well done. The
action is exciting, and her characters are deep and believable. In fact, the
series is carried by the protagonist, Aleytys, who is on a quest to uncover her
heritage. We were curious how the series got started. Did Clayton conceive of
Aleytys or the Diadem first? Well, Aleytys is the character, first of all.
Actually, the first image that hit me was that first page of the first book. I
just got this feeling for something suddenly and breaking
into the world that she knew. The crash of the ship of the thief. He was also
one of the first characters I came up with. I could see him in his flight. Well,
I see these things. You know, once I get to know them, I'm a very visual person.
There's this little movie screen in the front of my head that goes through. But
those are the things that came first of all. The picture of the thief in flight.
I didn't know what he had stolen. The crashing on the world. I didn't know what
that crash meant. And slowly building up complications. I like complications.
When one reads the Diadem series sequentially, he sees the continuing
evolution of Clayton's writing style. Yes. For instance, the first novel
carefully explains the concept of the Diadem, the alien artifact containing
three trapped human spirits. It also covers how Aleytys learn to draw power
from it. But in the later novels, the Diadem more or less takes a back seat to
other issues. Here Clayton comments. I also am thinking of the series as my
workshop education in writing. And the concepts I might have had in the
beginning, I'm not going to stick with them. I'll modify them as necessary as I
learn more about my craft.
More and more, in the last books, I hope, the character of the people who are
trapped in the Diadem is coming through. And as they come out,
achieve re-embodied, or whatever you want to call it, they become more and more
real to me, and more important than the Diadem itself. Aleytys is a very tough,
strong character. This happened partly because of Clayton's experience in
dealing with teenagers as a teacher. She consequently had to place Aleytys in
situations where even her powers would be tested. I said before that I was in a
situation where I was really banging my head against the wall. I was teaching
English, you know, and while this is very important, there were so many things
happening to my kids. I guess I got too involved with them. That I was totally
helpless to alleviate things that, you know, the pressures on them, the wounds
that they got from the world around them, that I was just absolutely useless in
helping them live through. Only I created perhaps a character that was, in the
end, a little bit too powerful, too able to go to, well, magic her way out of
things. So I had to recreate problems for her and help her come to an
understanding of the limitations of power, which I guess is one of the themes
in, if there are themes in what I'm writing. More on our next show with Jo
Clayton.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Jo Clayton has written seven science
fiction novels in the Diadem series. She has plans for writing two more. But
Clayton has also written two novels so far in the Duel of Sorcery series, which
is fantasy. These novels are Moongather and Moonscatter. We asked Clayton why
she decided to write fantasy amidst writing all that science fiction. Here she
tells us about the rather unique source of inspiration. Oh? There's a cockroach
sat down beside me one day. That is the literal truth.
It's one of these huge ones, about three inches long. I'm sitting, you know, I
told you I lived in this little place, little old shotgun apartment above a
private house, and I'm sitting on the steps waiting for the mailman to come.
It's the thing I do, you know, writers do. And this cockroach came crawling down
the side of the house, and it sat there and it looked at me. And, you know, your
first reaction with a cockroach is smash it. But I decided just to sit there and
look at it, and it's a really disgusting little creature. Actually, it's kind of
pretty in its way. Very nice lines, very bright black eyes. We looked alert. And
it just sat there, and we looked at each other for a while. And so I decided to
write a story about a cockroach, and I decided that it was going to be fantasy.
It just seemed to fit in fantasy. So that cockroach ended up, I believe, with
about maybe 10 pages out of 300 or something like that. But he was in there. He
was my inspiration. And, I don't know, it just felt like a writing fantasy. It
wasn't any great and momentous decision. It's just the way it turned out.
The Cockroach Passage, by the way, is in the first novel in the series,
Moongather. Sometimes fantasy is criticized as being someone easier to write
than science fiction because there are no rules to break. Right. Science fiction
takes place in a world with consistent logic, whereas in fantasy one can resort
to magic when things appear hopeless. If clumsily handled, such antics can
irritate the reader. Clayton told us, though, that she believes well-written
fantasy follows rules. I am one of those who really believes that there are
rules to magic. I don't believe in magic at all, but it's fun to play with.
It's, I don't know, it's sort of an extension of the psionics, which is
probably, at present, is not a science either. Might be, but many people are
skeptical about that. But I can't,
it is just the same thing in a sense as writing science fiction, only you write
in other
terms the same kind of rule keeping.
And the societies, you
can play with visual things and possibilities in a different way. It's not more
loose than science fiction if you do it properly, I think. It just has a
different set of assumptions. And it's fun to play with those assumptions. So,
fantasy or science fiction? Jo Clayton's carefully crafted work is worth
reading.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College. in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Science fiction is a genre which invites
writers to use a wide variety of writing styles. One writer who recently emerged
with a very distinctive style is Ann Maxwell, whose first novel, Change, was
published in 1975. We asked Maxwell how she decided to become a writer.
My husband was working overnight as a reporter in Riverside, California. So I
decided that I would write with myself, and that's what I did. Maxwell's multi
-layered, complex style is best seen in her series of four loosely connected
novels, The Singer Enigma, A Dead God Dancing, Name of a Shadow, and Jaws of
Menx. Set in the far future, these novels feature a common known universe
governed by a body called the Concord. The novels don't share common characters,
though. We wondered if Maxwell anticipated writing a series when she began the
first novel, The Singer Enigma. I decided that it had been fun to write a book
with Earth as a base for a first book. But I was, I truly wanted the freedom
that would come from not having the Earth as we know it now in the book. And
therefore I had to invent a system. And systems do, you know, people do tend
toward hierarchy and governments. And so I thought about those sorts of things
for a while until I created a framework within which I could create
different cultures that would yet be comprehensible
through the larger framework, in this case of Concord. It was a great deal of
fun, a great intellectual play to sit there and try to figure out how people who
are radically different might find ways to get along. And that in essence was
what the Concord was, the soul restraint against undeclared war, that sort of
thing. I at that time did not envision writing a series with continuing
characters, but I did envision writing more books within that universe. Maxwell
treats male-female relationships in great depth, not only in this series, but in
her other works, both in science fiction and out. All her novels feature
relationships between men and women of strong character. Hear Maxwell comments.
Yes, it always has. I think that two strong people, a man and a woman, together
can create possibilities
that neither alone would have. This is not two weak people holding each other
up. This is two strong people using relationships as a springboard to other
things. And yes, this is such a deeply held belief on my part that it's sort of
like pointing out that there's oxygen in the air to me. Now, I know other people
don't see life like that. This is simply one of my beliefs. And it is
ineradicable. It appears in all of my books, no matter what they are. This
series also features telepathic communications among various characters. An
interesting mechanical point is that the telepathic conversations are punctuated
with asterisks, rather than with italics or quotation marks, except in the last
novel, The Jaws of Menx. We asked Maxwell if this was her publisher's idea. Oh,
I wanted to do that. In fact, I did that up until Cigna NIL. And then Jaws of
Menx came out, and it was italicized instead of asterisk, which came as a
surprise to me, because it was submitted in asterisk. And at that point, there
was no way to object. It was a style change made by the house. My contracts and
I leave, and I see all such changes before they occur. But at that point, you
know, I have stuck with it, because it is the style of the house and the break
that's made. But I did resent, in a way, losing the ability to italicize for
emphasis, because you can't use that for telepathy and emphasis, at least not
very often, and not get away with it without confusing the reader. That's why I
chose the asterisk in the first place, to give me greater freedom. We'll have
more with Anne Maxwell on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Ann Maxwell began a new science fiction
series with the publication of Fire Dancer in 1982. Dancer's Luck and Dancer's
Illusion have come out since then. Unlike Maxwell's other science fiction
series, this one consists of tightly connected novels. Maxwell's writing
philosophy in the Fire Dancer series is quite different from that she used to
write the Concord series. I'm sure you've noticed the break between, say, Jaws
of Menx and Fire Dancer. It's the break not only of the universe that it was
written in, but of the intent of the books themselves. Fire Dancer. I sat down
intending to write a full-on, very accessible romp and enjoyed it thoroughly.
And from the response from the readers, I can only say they must have too.
Whereas with the earlier books, the Concord books, they are less accessible, far
more multilayered, and certainly did not attract the larger audience that the
Fire Dancer series has. They're just different books. The Fire Dancer series is
built around the relationship between Rheba, a Senyan dancer, and her Bre'n
mentor, Kirtn. Rheba is a young dancer who literally commands energy. When she
dances, the energy streams from her as if it were fire. Kirtn, who is of an
alien species, helps Rheba learn to control and modulate her powers. Rheba and
Kirtn are among the last of their respective races, and they are attempting in
the series to locate other survivors. Since it's not spelled out in the series,
we asked Maxwell to tell us how the relationship between the dancers and the
Bre'n might have evolved. They are constructs, as all is a construct, in that
sense. In other words, we are talking about a universe in which the, what we
would call human, or whatever you want to call it, is not new. It has evolved
independently. It has evolved with self-force evolution. It has evolved in other
people's labs against their will. This is a, not a world in which logic, as we
understand it, biology, is always going to be followed through. It is simply a
universe in which that which could survive and was created, did, and has. And
when you come to the darkness between the cycles, then you get a, both
a flowering and a weeding out. And what can survive that darkness does in a
changed form. In this sense, what we are talking about is the potential for a
deep telepathy that became realized to the point that it was necessary. It was a
necessary channel for the Bre'n and for the dancers who lack, whose gifts come
upon them rather all at once, and lack the ability to control them at first.
Then you, you become a situation where you are a symbiont, but not in the normal
physical sense. They can live separately. You can feed them separately.
Generally, they will lose themselves. They, to be, to reach anything approaching
their fullest potential, they must be paired. However, not all Bre'ns and not
all Senyasi are dancers, and the ones who aren't, are the basic changes that
they need to rest at all. There are many unanswered questions remaining after
three installments of the Fire Dancer series. We asked Maxwell if she plans to
wrap it up soon. Well, I must say that I would never, in one sense, totally
resolve the dancer thing. In other words, even if they do achieve some of Rheba's
goals, that is a beginning as well as an ending. If you have a whole new planet
of dancers plus the residue of slaves and talents from the planet Lu, you are
going to have a world, once again, that is dynamic, that is a synthesis of the
past rather than the repetition of it. And Maxwell has presented science fiction
with two very interesting yet quite different series. She certainly arrived to
watch.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.